README.md, before:

# Exploring benchmarks of the Look And Say sequence in Python

This repo exists because I saw an article that compared Python with some other languages.  It claimed Python took 45 seconds to do something that (it seemed to me) should be much faster.  This repo contains code I used to try a version of this benchmark for myself.

The article, which doesn't currently provide source code, is here: https://modelingguru.nasa.gov/docs/DOC-2783

The article describes several benchmarks, one of which was the Look And Say Sequence, which is described in this Wikipedia article: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Look-and-say_sequence

Essentially it's a sequence of numbers, each of whose decimal representation is similar to how one might verbally describe the previous number.

    1223334444
    -> one 1, two 2's, three 3's, 4 four's
    -> 11223344
    -> two 1's, two 2's, two 3's, two 4's
    -> 21222324
    -> one 2, one 1, three 2's, one 3, one 2, one 4
    -> 121132131214
    etc.

The authors of the article used the sequence starting with `1223334444`, and computed the sequence of "order" 45, which I understand to mean a sequence that's 45 items long.  The latter numbers in that sequence have thousands or millions of digits, and the authors use the sequence to test a programming language's handling of "large strings".

My code for computing this sequence is in `lookandsay.py`.  It contains several methods of computing this sequence.  A naive implementation did indeed run in about 45 seconds on my mid-2014 MacBook Pro (3GHz i7 with 16 GB ram; the authors use an i7 2.8 GHz Mac of some kind, but I don't know the year)  The fastest version of the code I was able to write, using Python's built in `io.StringIO` buffer class (but not the one using generator functions) ran in about 2.5 seconds, while the one with generators took about 5 seconds.  About 2 seconds of this is IO.  I was printing everything to the terminal, which I know is fairly slow.  I believe the authors were writing to a file.  I haven't tried that yet.

Further tools for optimization that I may explore at some point include profiling and Cython.  I don't see a reason why this shouldn't in principle  be able to approximately match Java's time of .05 seconds.  However the developer time needed to do such optimizations shouldn't be ignored; on the other hand, neither should the rarity or frequency of such performance needs for a given problem domain.  Oftentimes, Python is plenty fast and your bottleneck, if you have one, is IO.

Timing was initially done using the unix time command (but this isn't necessary with `benchmark.py`, which was added later):

    $ time python3 lookandsay.py 1223334444 45

Initially I misinterpreted the Look And Say problem, and instead counted total occurrences, producing a string like "one 1, two two's" and so forth.  The code for that is in `seeandsay.py`, and the code to generate random strings of digits is in `randomstrings.py`.  These were invoked using:

    $ python3 randomstrings.py 45 100 | time python3 seeandsay.py

Runtime for this incorrect interpretation was .06 seconds.

## Scripts

* `lookandsay.py` will run one of the various methods of computing the Look And Say sequence (each of which I call a "`runtype`"), and print its output to the console, one sequency entry on each line (note: a "line" might be millions of digits long).  Use the `-h` or `--help` command line option to see the expected command line parameters and list the runtypes.  benchmark.py and verify.py run this script, but consume its output, so it won't be visible when running them.
* `verify.py` will run some tests to verify that the various runtypes are working for a small number of iterations (currently 5).
* `benchmark.py` will time each runtype and print out the times in h:mm:ss.xxxxxx format:

      running: --naive
      Realtime: 0:01:46.429140

      running: --buffer
      Realtime: 0:00:02.413995

      running: --bufgen
      Realtime: 0:00:03.607056
  The `--naive` runtype is currently taking longer than it used to, due to some change I made before putting everything in version control.  
* `seeandsay.py` runs my original, incorrect interpretation of the Look And Say problem.  I might remove this one.  This reads a sequence of strings from standard input.
* `randomstrings.py` prints a sequence of positive integers of up to 100 random digits.  It takes 2 parameters: the number of lines and the maximum number digits.  This is only needed by seeandsay.py, so it might also be removed.

These scripts start with shebang lines, so on unix-like systems you can invoke them with `./<name-of-script>` instead of typing `python3 <name-of-script>`.  You may need to type `chmod u+x <name-of-script>` to set it to executable.

So far I've only tested this on MacOS, so there may be minor changes needed on Windows.

Commit message:

remove unnecessary conversion between string/int in naive implementation

README.md, after:

# Exploring benchmarks of the Look And Say sequence in Python

This repo exists because I saw an article that compared Python with some other languages.  It claimed Python took 45 seconds to do something that (it seemed to me) should be much faster.  This repo contains code I used to try a version of this benchmark for myself.

The article, which doesn't currently provide source code, is here: https://modelingguru.nasa.gov/docs/DOC-2783

The article describes several benchmarks, one of which was the Look And Say Sequence, which is described in this Wikipedia article: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Look-and-say_sequence

Essentially it's a sequence of numbers, each of whose decimal representation is similar to how one might verbally describe the previous number.

    1223334444
    -> one 1, two 2's, three 3's, 4 four's
    -> 11223344
    -> two 1's, two 2's, two 3's, two 4's
    -> 21222324
    -> one 2, one 1, three 2's, one 3, one 2, one 4
    -> 121132131214
    etc.

The authors of the article used the sequence starting with `1223334444`, and computed the sequence of "order" 45, which I understand to mean a sequence that's 45 items long.  The latter numbers in that sequence have thousands or millions of digits, and the authors use the sequence to test a programming language's handling of "large strings".

My code for computing this sequence is in `lookandsay.py`.  It contains several methods of computing this sequence.  A naive implementation did indeed run in about 45 seconds on my mid-2014 MacBook Pro (3GHz i7 with 16 GB ram; the authors use an i7 2.8 GHz Mac of some kind, but I don't know the year)  The fastest version of the code I was able to write, using Python's built in `io.StringIO` buffer class (but not the one using generator functions) ran in about 2.5 seconds, while the one with generators took about 5 seconds.  About 2 seconds of this is IO.  I was printing everything to the terminal, which I know is fairly slow.  I believe the authors were writing to a file.  I haven't tried that yet.

**Update:** The slowness of the naive implementation was due to unnecessarily converting between giant ints and strings at every iteration (which Python handles without complaint, by the way, it just takes a while).  After removing this unnecessary conversion, the naive implementation is now the fastest, but still takes 2.45 seconds.  If you still want it to be slow in this way, you can uncomment the appropriate line in `run_naive()`.

Further tools for optimization that I may explore at some point include profiling and Cython.  I don't see a reason why this shouldn't in principle  be able to approximately match Java's time of .05 seconds.  However the developer time needed to do such optimizations shouldn't be ignored; on the other hand, neither should the rarity or frequency of such performance needs for a given problem domain.  Oftentimes, Python is plenty fast and your bottleneck, if you have one, is IO.

Timing was initially done using the unix time command (but this isn't necessary with `benchmark.py`, which was added later):

    $ time python3 lookandsay.py 1223334444 45

Initially I misinterpreted the Look And Say problem, and instead counted total occurrences, producing a string like "one 1, two two's" and so forth.  The code for that is in `seeandsay.py`, and the code to generate random strings of digits is in `randomstrings.py`.  These were invoked using:

    $ python3 randomstrings.py 45 100 | time python3 seeandsay.py

Runtime for this incorrect interpretation was .06 seconds.

## Scripts

* `lookandsay.py` will run one of the various methods of computing the Look And Say sequence (each of which I call a "`runtype`"), and print its output to the console, one sequency entry on each line (note: a "line" might be millions of digits long).  Use the `-h` or `--help` command line option to see the expected command line parameters and list the runtypes.  benchmark.py and verify.py run this script, but consume its output, so it won't be visible when running them.
* `verify.py` will run some tests to verify that the various runtypes are working for a small number of iterations (currently 5).
* `benchmark.py` will time each runtype and print out the times in h:mm:ss.xxxxxx format:

      running: --naive
      Realtime: 0:00:02.456405

      running: --buffer
      Realtime: 0:00:02.597590

      running: --bufgen
      Realtime: 0:00:03.722954

* `seeandsay.py` runs my original, incorrect interpretation of the Look And Say problem.  I might remove this one.  This reads a sequence of strings from standard input.
* `randomstrings.py` prints a sequence of positive integers of up to 100 random digits.  It takes 2 parameters: the number of lines and the maximum number digits.  This is only needed by seeandsay.py, so it might also be removed.

These scripts start with shebang lines, so on unix-like systems you can invoke them with `./<name-of-script>` instead of typing `python3 <name-of-script>`.  You may need to type `chmod u+x <name-of-script>` to set it to executable.

So far I've only tested this on MacOS, so there may be minor changes needed on Windows.
